1  Conners 3 Update  The following updates have been made to the Conners 3rd Edition   ™   (Conners 3 ™ ): (1) Validity scale interpretation, (2)  T -score interpretation, and (3) renaming the Aggression scale to Defiance/Aggression. These changes are intended to improve the utility of the assessment in actual practice.  1. Validity Scale Interpretation  The Conners 3 includes three Validity scales: the Positive Impression (PI), Negative Impression (NI), and Incon-  sistency Index (IncX) scales. In the initial release of the  Conners 3 documentation, the guidelines for interpreta- tion of these Validity scales used the following language:  probably valid ,   possibly invalid , and   probably invalid . To  better align the interpretation guidelines with the intent of the scales, the guidelines have been revised using new  language. Validity scale scores should be considered as indicative of potentially problematic response styles (i.e.,  possible   positive ,   negative , or   inconsistent   response style;  see Table 1).  It is recommended that clinical judgment be used in the  interpretation of elevated Validity scale scores (i.e., raw scores that are above the cut-offs presented in Table 1). Item-level analysis can be useful in this process. Elevated  PI and NI scores may indicate a positive response style for  the PI and a negative response style for the NI. However, it  is possible that these scales could be elevated due to other reasons, such as in the case of an extremely well-behaved youth (an elevated PI score), or in the case of a youth who really does misbehave most of the time (an elevated  NI score). Similarly, while an elevated IncX score likely reflects an inconsistent response style, it is possible that it  is the youth’s behavior (rather than the rater’s responses)  that is inconsistent. Reviewing the responses to the items that make up these scales can help determine if there is a  problematic response style or if the scale elevations are  accurate reflections of the youth’s behavior.  Response Style Analysis using the Conners 3 Validity Scales Table 1.a   Positive Impression  Parent   Teacher   Self-Report   Interpretive Guideline  0–4   0–4   0–3   Overly positive response style not indicated.  5–6   5–6   4–6   Possible positive response style. Scores may present a more favorable impression than is warranted.  Table 1.b   Negative Impression  Parent   Teacher   Self-Report   Interpretive Guideline  0–4   0–4   0–4   Overly negative response style not indicated.  5–6   5–6   5–6   Possible negative response style. Scores may present a less favorable impression than is warranted.  Table 1.c   Inconsistency Index  Parent   Teacher   Self-Report   Interpretive Guideline  0–6 or < 2 absolute differences equal to 2 or 3 0–5 or < 2 absolute differences equal to 2 or 3 0–8 or < 2 absolute differences equal to 2 or 3  Inconsistent responding style not indicated. ≥ 7 and at least two  absolute differences equal to 2 or 3  ≥ 6 and at least two  absolute differences equal to 2 or 3  ≥ 9 and at least two  absolute differences equal to 2 or 3  Responses to similar items showed high levels of inconsistency. Scores may not accurately reflect the individual due to a careless or unusual response to some items.

2  Conners 3rd Edition ™   Supplement  2. T-Score Interpretation  A   T- score is a standardized score, which means that it can be compared across different raters or administration  dates.   T- scores for Conners 3 scales convert the raw scores  to reflect what is typical or atypical for that age and gender.  All   T- scores have a mean of 50 and a standard deviation  of 10. A perfectly average   T- score of 50 is exactly equal to  the mean score of that age and gender group. The average range falls within one standard deviation of the mean (i.e., between 40 and 59). For some scales on the Conners 3,  it is possible to get very extreme   T- scores (i.e., > 100).  To avoid over-interpretation of these extreme values, all  T- scores greater than 90 in the computerized reports (as in the paper forms) are reported as 90.  In the original guidelines for interpreting   T- scores, the  60 to 69 range was considered “elevated.” An additional condition, however, was imposed in that scores from 57 to 63 were specified as being in the “borderline” range.  The   T- score interpretive guidelines have been adjusted so  that the “borderline range” now reflects a specific category of scores (i.e., scores that are between 1 and 1.5 standard  deviations above the mean; 60 to 64) and is described as  “High Average.” 1 The new interpretive guidelines are as follows: A   T -score  in the “Very Elevated” range (i.e., > 2 standard deviations above the mean) is very likely to indicate a significant area of concern. A   T -score in the “Elevated” range (i.e., 1.5–2  standard deviations above the mean) usually indicates  significant concerns. A   T -score in the “High Average”  range requires careful consideration and clinical judgment, as this range is the borderline between typical and atypical  levels of concern.   T -scores falling below 60 generally indicate typical or absent concerns for the child’s age and  gender. (See Table 2 for a summary of these guidelines.) Remember that clinical training and judgment are required  for responsible interpretation of any test score; these score  classification guidelines should not be applied automati -  cally without careful interpretation by a clinician.  1   Data analyses of the normative and clinical samples revealed that  scores in the 60 to 64 range are almost equally likely to occur with clinical and non-clinical cases.  Note that these guidelines are approximations and should  not be used as absolute rules. There is no reason to believe  that there is a perceptible difference, for instance, between a   T -score of 64 and a   T -score of 65. Even if a youth  receives a score in a given range, if other information  (e.g., observation, interview, clinical history) suggests something different, then this must be taken into consid -  eration in the interpretation process. 2 This change applies to the interpretation of   T- scores for the  Conners 3 Content scales, DSM-IV-TR Symptom scales,  and to   T -scores on the various Conners 3 components. 3  The interpretation of discrepancies between DSM-IV-TR Symptom Counts and   T- scores have been updated to  reflect the changes in the   T -score guidelines; see Table  3. These discrepancies are to be expected, given that the Symptom Count and   T- score are based on different metrics  (i.e., absolute versus relative). Because the DSM-IV-TR Symptom scale   T- scores take age and gender into account,  they may at times be more sensitive to atypicality for that peer group, even if symptoms do not meet the absolute  symptom count level. The standalone Conners 3 ADHD Index ™   (Conners 3AI ™ ) is a good general indicator of whether a given youth is  similar to youth with ADHD (based on responses on the  Conners 3), or more similar to youth without a clinical  diagnosis. This index provides a probability score that  represents the percentage of time that the score occurred  in youth with a diagnosis of ADHD as opposed to youth with no clinical diagnosis. The Conners 3AI   T -score is easily interpreted using the same guidelines displayed in  Table 2. At times, there may be discrepancies between  the Conners 3AI probability score and   T -score. This  difference is to be expected, given that the probability score and   T -score are based on different metrics. The  Conners 3AI   T -score is age and gender specific, while the Conners 3AI probability score is not. The probability score indicates how likely a clinical classification is, while  the   T -score indicates whether the youth is showing typical or atypical levels of these symptoms, relative to age- and  gender-based expectations. See Table 4 for guidelines for  the interpretation of the probability and   T -scores based on  the new score ranges.  2   This falls under Step 5 (Integrate Results) of the Step-by-Step Interpretation Guidelines in chapter 6 of your Conners 3 Manual.  3   Including the full-length Conners 3, the Conners 3 Short, the  Conners 3 Global Index ™ , and the Conners 3 ADHD Index ™ .

3  April, 2009  3. Defiance/Aggression  Scale  All three versions (Parent, Teacher, Self-Report) of the Conners 3 include an Aggression scale. However, the true  content of the scale measures not only agression, but also  defiance (behaviors that are considered problematic but do not have overt expression of agression). To reflect this  broader content, the scale name has been changed from  Aggression to Defiance/Aggression. 4   The characteristics  of high scorers on the Defiance/Aggression scale are: May be argumentative. May defy requests from adults. May have poor control of anger and may lose temper. May be physically and/or verbally aggressive. May show violent or destructive tendencies. May bully others. May be manipula -  tive or cruel. May break rules and/or have legal issues.  4   Note that this change has been reflected in the Feedback handout. The Conners 3 full-length and Short form computer -  ized Assessment Report includes a feedback handout that can  be shared with people who are not familiar with the Conners  3 (e.g., parents, school staff, lawyers, therapists, coaches, or youth). The computer-generated feedback handout includes a  brief description of the Conners 3, a summary table of results,  additional topics for discussion, and the level of impairment. In this handout, the “Aggression” category has been renamed “Defiance/Aggression.” The underlying cause of an elevated Defiance/Aggression score (i.e., defiant vs. aggressive) can be discerned by looking at the item level responses (Step 4 of the Step- by-Step Interpretation Guidelines in chapter 6 of your Conners 3 Manual). The examination of the responses to  items in the scale can help determine if the scale elevation  is caused by defiant behaviors (e.g., “Actively refuses to do what adults tell him/her to do,” “Argues with adults”), aggressive behaviors (e.g., “Physically hurts people,” “Threatens to hurt others”), or both types of behaviors.  Table 2.   Understanding T-scores and Percentiles T-score   Percentile   Guideline  70+   98+   Very Elevated Score (Many more concerns than are typically reported) 65–69   93–97   Elevated Score (More concerns than are typically reported)  60–64   84–92   High Average Score (Slightly more concerns than are typically reported) 40–59   16–83   Average Score (Typical levels of concern)  < 40   < 16   Low Score (Fewer concerns than are typically reported)

4  Conners 3rd Edition ™   Supplement  Table 3.   Interpretation Guidelines for DSM-IV-TR Scores on the Conners 3  DSM-IV-TR T-score DSM-IV-TR Symptom Count   Interpretation Guidelines  T -score and Symptom  Count are elevated  ≥ 65   At or above  DSM-IV-TR cut-off  score  Significant features of the disorder are present in that setting.  The symptoms are occurring in excess of what is typical for that  youth’s age and gender. This diagnosis should be given strong consideration.  Only   T -score is elevated   ≥ 65   Below DSM-IV-TR  cut-off score  Features of this diagnosis are not prominent in that setting.  The symptoms that are present are occurring in excess of what is  typical for that youth’s age and gender.  Although the current presentation is atypical for the youth’s age and  gender, there are not sufficient symptoms reported to meet DSM- IV-TR symptomatic criteria for this disorder. The assessor may wish  to consider alternative explanations for why the   T -scores could be  elevated in the absence of this diagnosis (e.g., another diagnosis may be producing these types of concerns in that particular setting). Only Symptom Count is  elevated  ≤ 64   At or above  DSM-IV-TR cut-off  score  Significant features of the disorder are present in that setting.  The symptoms are at (or below) developmental expectations for that  age and gender. Although the absolute DSM-IV-TR symptomatic criteria may  have been met, the current presentation is not atypical for this age  and gender. The assessor should carefully consider whether or not  symptoms are present in excess of developmental expectations (an  important requirement of DSM-IV-TR diagnosis).  T -score and Symptom  Count are average or below  ≤ 64   Below DSM-IV-TR  cut-off score  Features of this diagnosis are not prominent in that setting.  Any symptoms that are present are at (or below) developmental  expectations for that age and gender. It is unlikely that the diagnosis is currently present (although criteria may have been met in the past).  Table 4.   Interpretation Guidelines for the Conners 3AI  Conners 3AI Probability Score Conners 3AI  T -score   Interpretation Guidelines  Both scores are elevated   ≥ 61%   ≥ 65   The responses are very similar to those describing youth with  ADHD. More of the key features of ADHD are present than expected for this age and gender.  Probability score in borderline range,  T -score is elevated  51–60%   ≥ 65   The responses are somewhat similar to those describing youth with  ADHD. More of the key features of ADHD are present than expected for this age and gender.  Only   T- score is elevated   ≤ 50%   ≥ 65   The responses are more similar to those describing youth in the  general population than those describing youth with ADHD, but key features of ADHD are occurring in excess of what is typical for that youth’s age and gender.  The assessor may wish to consider alternate explanations for why the  T -score could be elevated (e.g., another issue besides ADHD may be producing these types of concerns in that particular setting).  Only probability score is elevated  ≥ 61%   ≤ 64   The responses are very similar to those describing youth with  ADHD, but key features of ADHD are at (or below) developmental expectations for that age and gender. Although the youth’s responses are like those of youth with ADHD, the current presentation is not atypical for this age and gender.  The assessor should give careful consideration as to whether the  symptoms are present in excess of developmental expectations.  Probability score in borderline range,  T -score is average/low 51–60%   ≤ 64   The responses are somewhat similar to those describing youth with  ADHD, but any key features of ADHD that are present are at (or below) developmental expectations for that age and gender. Both scores are average  or below  < 50%   ≤ 64   The responses are more similar to those describing youth in the  general population than those describing youth with ADHD. Any key features of ADHD that are present are at or below developmental expectations for that age and gender.

